Gender Egalitarianism and
 Women’s Descriptive Representation

Thank you for that introduction, and thank you for being here, both here in the room and online.
And thanks to the Cluster for having me here this summer.
It's been really great to see the wonderful scholarly community you all have built here, and I really appreciate the chance to be a part of it, if only for a couple of months.

So, right, I'm going to talk with you today about my work with Byung-Deuk Woo on Gender Egalitarianism and Women's Descriptive Representation, which is part of a book project we’re working on.
This is fresh, raw, new work.
I will really appreciate all of your perspectives on this, and I will definitely be able to work them into the manuscript.

> The research question is one right at the heart of the politics of inequality: When do women win office? And what part do public attitudes toward gender roles play in the process?
Not surprisingly, given the importance of the question, we have a range of theories on this.

The first contends that this is a top-down process.
In this account, activists of the women's movement do the truly heroic work of convincing the patriarchal, male old guard of political parties to put women on the ballot.

On the one hand, this involves demanding--and getting--commitments that the party will have women make up a specific share of its slate of candidates, that is, that the party will adopt a gender quota.

On the other hand, whether or not a party makes a formal commitment in the form of a quota, activists push for parties to run more female candidates--and the push to overcome the biases of the existing male party leadership has proven easier when and where the electoral system consists of, or includes, a party-list component rather than only highly personalized races within small districts.
In the purest forms of the top-down theory, that's it: The activists' hard work within political parties to get more women on the ballot is the whole story.
In this telling, the public, the voters, are basically ambivalent with regard to electing men or women--and there *are* various experimental studies that provide evidence that this is true in some contexts--so it is the *supply* of female candidates that determines how many women win elected office.
Now, there's a *ton* of evidence--qualitative and quantitative--for the hypotheses implied by the top-down account, decades' worth of work on this topic, really, that show that quotas and party lists yield more women's descriptive representation.
It is, by now, super-well established stuff.

Yet there is a second theory, one that I'm going to label "bottom up," that contends that public attitudes cannot be dismissed as readily as they are in the purest top-down accounts.
The bottom-up story is straightforward: when the electorate holds a more gender-egalitarian view of women's roles in the public sphere, parties run more women, and more women win election.
Where traditional attitudes relegating women to the private sphere of home and children are more dominant, conversely, parties put forward fewer female candidates, and fewer women gain office.
Now, btw, I should mention that people in *this* literature, which stretches back to at least Wilma Rule Krause’s 1974 APSR article, people in this literature sometimes talk about these attitudes as ideology or culture; I'm with those who prefer to call broadly held attitudes and preferences "public opinion," but it’s all the same concept.

In addition, there’s a third possibility that I personally think makes a lot of sense.
This interactive theory says that public attitudes will shape the extent to which the institutions featured in the top-down theory yield more women in office.
There's been a lot of really detailed work across a wide range of cases that shows that a party's mere adoption of a quota isn't sufficient to get women in office.
A patriarchical party leadership can have it both ways: it can mollify, at least in the short run, the feminist activists it confronts by making a commitment to run more women, but then put female candidates only in unwinnable districts or in uncompetitive slots on the party's list.
And to the extent that the electorate holds traditional views, the old male party leadership can point to these public attitudes as justification for its half-hearted efforts.
As the public becomes more egalitarian, however, this patriarchical argument is undercut, and so not only will activists succeed in getting more women on the ballot, but these female candidates will be placed in more winnable positions. [see Ruedin 2012]
Put another way, as public demand for more women candidates grows, the supply provided by parties will respond.
Now, that's the argument for positive interactions.

There is another theory that suggests negative interactions.
Remember, interactions are always reciprocal, so if public opinion affects the effect of quotas, for example, that also implies that quotas affect the effect of public opinion.
And this effect may not be the positive, reinforcing, one that I outlined a moment ago.
If activists' success in winning the agreement of party leaders to adopt a quota or to place more women on the party list, if that success comes down to intraparty negotiations that are unrelated to public opinion as the top-down theory would lead us to expect, then these moves may increase supply well beyond the public's demand.
In that case, and I thank Aina for helpfully pointing this out to me, the interaction of gender quotas and lists with public opinion will be *negative*: that an effect of public opinion on women's descriptive representation may exist when there is not a quota or list, but this effect will be dampened, or even completely blotted out, when a quota is adopted or where there is a list.

A big reason why we don’t really know whether or how public attitudes might play a role here is because we haven’t really been able to measure them very effectively.

> Before I continue, I should probably clarify what attitudes we’re talking about.  As you can see, there are many potentially relevant views, but we focus on whether people say women and men should enjoy equality in the public sphere of the workplace and politics.

But even when pollsters have asked questions about people’s attitudes toward equality in the public sphere . . .

> we’ve gotten *this*:
A bunch of different questions asked in different places at different times.
As a result, existing work has looked at one or a couple cross-sections or it's used pretty crude proxies for public attitudes.
The whole line of research on bottom-up sources of women’s descriptive representation hasn't really advanced much, it seems to me, in at least the past decade, probably close to two, for want of data.
If you know my work on the Standardized World Income Inequality Database, you may recognize this situation.  
It’s the same issue the SWIID addresses for income inequality data.
The SWIID was the inspiration for me to do the same thing for public opinion data.

> So, along with Lindsey Goldberg, we collected relevant information in 88 different survey datasets…

Covering 124 countries, excluding those with only one year of data

Totaling almost 1200 country-years (out of almost 6000 if we had rectangular data, 

or 2700 just to fill in the years spanned in each country)
These data are sparse

And there’s *46* different questions asked.  
The answers are incomparable.

> So we took all of those data and we fed it into DCPO, a latent variable model that I came up.
DCPO stands for dynamic comparative public opinion.
We fed these data into DCPO, and it modeled the incomparability and sparsity of the data and gives us estimates.

> And those estimates let us make big cross-national cross-regional comparisons.
So many comparisons, it’s hard to see them all.
The three Scandinavian countries are at the top, along with Puerto Rico, France, and Spain.
Burkina Faso is at the bottom, followed by a bunch of other Muslim-majority countries.
Germany is here, if you haven’t found it yet.

> But we don’t have to stop at comparing levels, we get to look at trends, too.
There are plenty of countries where the public has been growing more egalitarian over time,  but many too where attitudes has been pretty flat, and some where egalitarianism has declined.

> Cool, right?  
The paper the three of us wrote presenting and validating these data, which we call the Public Gender Egalitarianism database, was accepted by the BJPS in May right before I came here.
The data are available on the web.
Point your phone camera at the big square, tap on it, and it should take you right there.
There’s a web app that lets you explore the dataset and you can follow the link to the Dataverse and download the whole thing.
The link to the preprint is there, too.
With this big cross-national time series dataset, we can finally better investigate these theories about how the public’s attitudes toward gender equality in the public sphere matter to women’s descriptive representation.

> But we need to define the universe for the study.
As always, there are competing concerns.  
On the one hand, we want to look as broadly as possible: we want to minimize sampling bias that could influence our results and conclusions.
The desire to get beyond "just the U.S." or "just western Europe" was of course a big reason to generate the PGE data in the first place, to enable "cross-national, cross-regional" work.
But, on the other hand, we always need to avoid including cases to which the theory just doesn't apply.
The theories I outlined above, at least those beyond the top-down theory, the ones that have to do with public opinion, presuppose a certain minimum level of democracy--at least the minimal Przeworkski, Alvarez, Cheibub, and Limongi definition of democracy, "contested elections with broad suffrage for the most important offices"--and so countries that don't clear that very low bar should be excluded.
And politics works in many developing democracies in ways that suggest that the processes these theories describe may unfold very differently there--widespread clientelism of the sort we heard about last week and earlier this summer, for example, is thought to work to exclude women from politics at every level.
So in light of these considerations, we are looking at advanced democracies.
It's important, though, to be sure to not interpret "advanced democracies" as simply "western Europe and the British offshoots."
And, further, one doesn't want to open the door to the garden of forking paths that comes with hand-picking the countries.
So we settled on the 38 countries of the current OECD.
Yes, it's the usual suspects of most of Europe plus the United States and 
Canada-Australia-New Zealand, but also Japan and Korea in east Asia, Turkey and Israel in west Asia, and Mexico, Costa Rica, Colombia, and Chile in Latin America.
Or, you know, about one China's worth of people; it's easy to see that there's still a lot of pale gray out there to work on too.
But these theories I just outlined apply to these pretty blue countries, so we're starting with them.

> And, to start today, I work with data on quotas and on women in legislatures from the excellent QAROT dataset, by Hughes, Paxton, Clayton, and Zetterberg, which just won the Lijphart/Przeworski/Verba Data Set Award from the Comparative Politics section of the APSA.
Data on whether the electoral system contains at _least_ a party-list _component_ comes from Borman and Golder's Democratic Electoral Systems Around the World.  
And of course PGE for the public's attitudes on gender equality in the public sphere.  
And although women's share of the legislature does fluctuate a little in the course of most legislative terms--people retire and so on--that's not really relevant to these theories, which all focus on what happens in elections.  
So our unit of analysis is the country-election, not the country-year.
We have an unbalanced sample: some countries hold elections more often than others, of course, but we also have longer series of PGE data for some countries than others.
Our scale here runs from light to dark: the darker the country the more observations we have.
We end up with 334 country-elections all together: almost 9 elections per country, on average, but again, as the shading indicates, the sample is unbalanced.
I could probably bump up that number of observations quite a bit by collecting data on women's share of legislatures in the most recent elections--the QAROT data currently ends in 2015--but that's what we've got for now.

: So what does that let us see?
Let's start by looking at the raw bivariate data.
Each point here represents an election in a particular country; if you have sharp eyes you might even pick out that they are labeled with the countries' iso2c codes.
On the x-axis, we have Public Gender Egalitarianism measured in the year before the election was held.
And the PGE is estimated with uncertainty; that is why we see those horizontal whiskers on each point.
On our y-axis here, we have descriptive representation, measured as the percentage of seats won by women in each election to the lower house of the national legislature.
The positive relationship between the two is pretty easy to see, I think.
Taking the uncertainty in the PGE scores into account, the bivariate correlation is .63.
That's at least suggestive that there's something going on here.
So let's push onward.
 I fit multi-level models of these data, with the elections nested in countries.
Given that the "party list" variable is constant over this time for nearly all of these cases, I prefer multilevel modeling to models with country fixed-effects, but except for party lists the results are virtually identical, though with maybe a bit less uncertainty.

Anyway, so first we basically replicate the scatterplot, but including varying intercepts by country that puts the focus on over-time variation.
The estimate here is that increasing PGE in the year before the election from one standard deviation below its mean to one standard deviation above the mean is associated with an increase in women's share of the legislature of about twelve-and-a-half plus or minus two-and-a-half percentage points.  
Granted, the median change in PGE from one election to the next within a country is only a little more than a sixth of that, yielding an estimate of a typical short-run change in women's descriptive representation of somewhat more than two percentage points.

When we bring in national-level statutory quotas, the focus of much of the literature, the PGE estimate drops a bit, to 10 percentage points, again plus or minus 2-and-a-half.
The estimate for National Quota indicates that a change equivalent to adopting a 25% quota for female candidates when there had been no quota before is associated with women making up an additional six percent of the legislature, give or take a point.

The difference between countries with and without party-list electoral systems is also estimated to be about 6 percent of the legislature, plus-or-minus 4 percent in this case.  Controlling for this difference does nothing to the estimates I just described.

The next two models test for interactions of public gender egalitarianism with quotas, 

and then with party lists.  Both of these estimates are very close to exactly zero.
Looking across these results, I see support for the bottom-up theory as a complement to the top-down processes that we've really developed a good understanding of over the past two-three decades.

> BUT: I'm betting at least some of you have spotted a disconnect between the theories as I laid them out and this evidence.
The theories were all about things going on at the party level, right?  
*Parties* respond to internal activist pressure and adopt quotas, *parties* react to an increasingly egalitarian public by running more women candidates who can get elected, and so on.
But the unit of analysis here is the country-election. 
We can't really see what going on within the parties, really not at all.

> So let's shift to the *party*-election level.
I compiled data on women's share of each party's legislative representation after each election from a couple of great articles that became available FirstView in the APSR just this spring.
Weeks, Meguid, Kittilson, and Coffé 2022 on when Europe's extreme right parties elect more women, and--
Adams, Bracken, Gidron, Horne, O’Brien, and Senk 2022 on the moderating effect of elected women on outparty evaluations.
I recommend both of these pieces to you, btw, if you haven't seen them yet: each of them is a fantastic work with an all-star cast of authors.
Anyway, I raided those articles' replication materials for data, and then Byung-Deuk and I collected a bunch more, especially for the South Korean and the Latin American cases, which neither of those works had included at all.
With party-elections as the unit of analysis, we have almost two thousand observations across our 38 OECD countries.

> So, what do we see now? 
Well, as one might have expected, the bivariate relationship is a lot noisier.
For the purposes of presentation, I faded the points in this plot by the parties' share of the legislature: the biggest parties are darkest and the tiniest parties are very light.
But, for the time being at least, I'm following the existing literature and doing nothing with weighting, which means, in effect, weighting each party-election observation equally.
And to be upfront, I feel like these are together a really hard test, because in this literature almost nothing predicts when women will make up a larger share of a party's members of the legislature—sometimes not even national quotas.

These are, again, multilevel models, but now they are cross-classified: party-elections are nested in parties and in country-elections . . . 

which are both nested in countries.
In other words, we have varying intercepts for each party, for each election in a country, and for each country.

Yeah, enough stalling: here's what we get.
A little surprisingly, I think, we get pretty much exactly the same results.
A two-standard-deviation rise in public gender egalitarianism in the year before an election is associated with almost a twelve percentage point increase, plus-or-minus two-and-a-half points, in women's share of a party's seats in the legislature in the bivariate model.

This estimate drops to ten points plus-or-minus two when quotas are added--and now quotas are measured to include voluntary party quotas as well as statutory national quotas.
The quota estimate is seven-and-a-half points plus or minus one--a bit larger than in the models at the country-election level.
I put that down to the better measurement.

Looking across the rest of the models, 

these results don't change much either,

although the point estimate for party lists is a bit smaller and no longer statistically significant at the 5% level.
Intriguingly, the last model, with the interaction between public gender egalitarianism and party lists, that one lends some support to the negative interaction theory that Aina suggested. 

That is, that parties under pressure from feminist activists within the party will run more female candidates in party list systems and so elect a statistically significantly larger proportion of women, when the public is not all that egalitarian, than parties in systems without lists.
This difference between parties in list and non-list systems shrinks and loses statistical significance when public gender egalitarianism is greater, until in the most egalitarian settings the difference across electoral systems is estimated to be nearly exactly zero.  
That's a pretty cool result, I think: it shows how party-list electoral systems have presented opportunities for feminist activists to reach their goals even in the face of relatively inhospitable public opinion.
So: thanks again, Aina!

> All right, it's time to wrap up.
To review the findings, we found plenty of support for the well established top-down theory that feminist activists working within political parties are a major force for getting women elected.
Gender quotas and party lists, the key institutional features associated with this argument, are robustly associated with more female candidates winning office at both the country and the party level.
But there's strong support, too, for the bottom-up theory, which complicates the purest versions of the top-down theory: the activists working hard within parties to build space for women are not the entire story.
More women gain office when the public's views on the role of women in the workplace and in politics are more egalitarian.
The two are complements.
It does not appear, though, that they interact in the sense that parties do not seem to respond to greater public demand for gender equality by making their gender quotas more effective or placing women in better spots on their party list.
These sorts of positive interactions just are not supported in the analyses I have shown you today.
Conversely, in fact, our findings indicate that electoral systems with a party-list component seem to better position activists to get more candidates on the ballot and in office than electoral systems without this feature do *when the public's views are relatively _in_egalitarian*.
Non-party-list systems elect similar numbers of women only when public gender egalitarianism is high.

> So that's where things stand.
The attitudes of the public, which were, back in the twentieth century and the early years of this one, a big part of how scholars tried to explain how women win office, these attitudes have lately been pretty neglected.
And I think that is down to measurement--until now, it's been easier to measure the other sorts of things thought to enter party elites' calculations.
But the PGE database gives us a new lens for examining these questions and others--for our book manuscript, we're also working on the question of whether public opinion, independent of women's descriptive representation, directly shapes the adoption of policies like family leave and efforts to combat violence against women.
I mean, it might: even male legislators will want to satisfy their constituents who want gender egalitarian policies, and they may be more likely to even be more egalitarian themselves.
So we'll see, though it really could be that if there's a relationship it all works through women legislatures.
But that's future work.
Right now, we conclude that taking public gender egalitarianism into account is a valuable complement to top-down elite-led theories of how women gain descriptive representation.
Thank you for your attention; I look forward to your questions and comments.